
 Before DevOps We have other models:
 
 Waterfal model:
 1. Requirment  2. design  3. Implementation 4. Test 5. Deployment
 
 Drawback:
 1. Required lots of time before bussiness goes live.
 2. Lack of communication between Bussiness, Devlopment and operations team.
 3. we cannot change application after deployment.
 
 Agile:
 Agile is a software development methodology that focuses on iterative development, collaboration, customer feedback, and flexibility to change.
 
 1. Plan  2. code  3. build  4. Test  5. Release  6. deploy 7. Review 8. Repeate
 
 Drawback: 
 1. Lack of communication between operations and development team.
 
 
 
 What is DevOps?
 DevOps is a set of practices and tools that integrates software development (Dev) and IT operations (Ops). The goal of DevOps is to shorten the software development lifecycle and provide continuous delivery with high software quality.
 
 Key Concepts of DevOps:
 
 1. Collaboration
 2. Continuous integrations / continuous Devlopment (CI/CD)
 3. Monitoring
 4. Infrastucture as a code 
 5. Automation 
 
 
 -------------------------------------------------------Docker-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 What is containerization?
 Containerization is a lightweight form of virtualization that involves packaging an application along with all its dependencies (libraries, configuration files, binaries) into a single, self-contained unit called a container.
 
 or 
 
 A container is a standard unit of software that packages up code and all its dependencies so the application runs quickly and reliably from one computing environment to another. A Docker container image is a lightweight, standalone, executable package of software that includes everything needed to run an application: code, runtime, system tools, system libraries and settings.
 
 Containers vs Virtual Machine:
 Containers and virtual machines are both technologies used to isolate applications and their dependencies, but they have some key differences:
 
 1. Resource Utilization: Containers share the host operating system kernel, making them lighter and faster than VMs. VMs have a        full-fledged OS and hypervisor, making them more resource-intensive.
 
 2. Portability: Containers are designed to be portable and can run on any system with a compatible host operating system. VMs are less portable as they need a compatible hypervisor to run.
 
 3. Security: VMs provide a higher level of security as each VM has its own operating system and can be isolated from the host and other VMs. Containers provide less isolation, as they share the host operating system.
 
 4. Management: Managing containers is typically easier than managing VMs, as containers are designed to be lightweight and fast-moving.
 
 WHY CONTAINERS ARE LIGHT WEIGHT IN NATURE?
 
 Containers are lightweight because they use a technology called containerization, which allows them to share the host operating system's kernel and libraries, while still providing isolation for the application and its dependencies. This results in a smaller footprint compared to traditional virtual machines, as the containers do not need to include a full operating system. Additionally, Docker containers are designed to be minimal, only including what is necessary for the application to run, further reducing their size.
 
 
 
 Files and Folders in containers base images:
    
	/bin: contains binary executable files, such as the ls, cp, and ps commands.

    /sbin: contains system binary executable files, such as the init and shutdown commands.

    /etc: contains configuration files for various system services.

    /lib: contains library files that are used by the binary executables.

    /usr: contains user-related files and utilities, such as applications, libraries, and documentation.

    /var: contains variable data, such as log files, spool files, and temporary files.

    /root: is the home directory of the root user.
	
 
 Files and Folders that containers use from host operating system:

  The host's file system: Docker containers can access the host file system using bind mounts, which allow the container to read and write files in the host file system.

  Networking stack: The host's networking stack is used to provide network connectivity to the container. Docker containers can be connected to the host's network directly or through a virtual network.

  System calls: The host's kernel handles system calls from the container, which is how the container accesses the host's resources, such as CPU, memory, and I/O.

  Namespaces: Docker containers use Linux namespaces to create isolated environments for the container's processes. Namespaces provide isolation for resources such as the file system, process ID, and network.

  Control groups (cgroups): Docker containers use cgroups to limit and control the amount of resources, such as CPU, memory, and I/O, that a container can access.
   


  It's important to note that while a container uses resources from the host operating system, it is still isolated from the host and other containers, so changes to the container do not affect the host or other containers.
 
 Note: There are multiple ways to reduce your VM image size as well, but I am just talking about the default for easy comparision and understanding.
 
 so, in a nutshell, container base images are typically smaller compared to VM images because they are designed to be minimalist and only contain the necessary components for running a specific application or service. VMs, on the other hand, emulate an entire operating system, including all its libraries, utilities, and system files, resulting in a much larger size.
 
 I hope it is now very clear why containers are light weight in nature.
   
 
 
 What is docker container?
 
 Docker is a containerization platform that provides easy way to containerize your applications, which means, using Docker you can build container images, run the images to create containers and also push these containers to container regestries such as DockerHub, Quay.io and so on.

 In simple words, you can understand as containerization is a concept or technology and Docker Implements Containerization.  
 
 
 Your First Docker Usecase
 
 # Run a Docker container with a Python hello world application in detached mode
 docker run -d -p 5000:5000 in28min/hello-world-python:0.0.1.RELEASE
 
 # Run a Docker container with a Java hello world application in detached mode
 docker run -d -p 5000:5000 in28min/hello-world-java:0.0.1.RELEASE
 
 # Run a Docker container with a Node.js hello world application in detached mode
 docker run -d -p 5000:5000 in28min/hello-world-nodejs:0.0.1.RELEASE
 
 # View the logs of a Docker container
 docker logs 04e52ff9270f5810eefe1f77222852dc1461c22440d4ecd6228b5c38f09d838e

 # View the logs of a Docker container with a given container ID or name
 docker logs c2ba
 
 # List Docker images
 docker images
 
 # List running containers
 docker container ls
 
 # List all containers, including stopped ones
 docker container ls -a
 
 # Stop a running container with a given container ID
 docker container stop f708b7ee1a8b
 
 
   DOCKER ARCHITECTURE
   -------------------          
   
   
                         Docker client
						      |
						 Docker Daemon
						      |
	                          |					 
			 Containers    Images      Container registery			  
						 
						 
	When we run a command docker client sent the command to docker daemon who is responsible to manage container, images and registery.


   1. Docker Engine
   
   The heart of Docker. It's a client-server application with three main components:
  
  a. Docker Client
  CLI tool (docker) that users interact with.
  
  Sends commands (like docker build, docker run, etc.) to the Docker daemon using a REST API.
  
  Can connect to remote Docker daemons.
  
  b. Docker Daemon (dockerd)
  The background service running on the host machine.
  
  Responsible for building, running, and managing Docker containers.
  
  Communicates with other daemons and handles container orchestration.
  
  c. Docker REST API
  The interface used by the client to interact with the daemon.
  
  Provides access to Docker functionalities programmatically.
  
  
  
  Docker LifeCycle:
  We can use the above Image as reference to understand the lifecycle of Docker.

  There are three important things,
  
  1. docker build -> builds docker images from Dockerfile
  2. docker run -> runs container from docker images
  3. docker push -> push the container image to public/private regestries to share the docker images.
  
  
  
  Reasons why docker is popular:
  1. standarized packaging
  2. Multi platform support 
  3. Ligh-weight & isolation
  
  
  Understanding the terminology (Inspired from Docker Docs)
  
  Docker daemon:
  The Docker daemon (dockerd) listens for Docker API requests and manages Docker objects such as images, containers, networks, and volumes. A daemon can also communicate with other daemons to manage Docker services.
  
  Docker client:
  The Docker client (docker) is the primary way that many Docker users interact with Docker. When you use commands such as docker run, the client sends these commands to dockerd, which carries them out. The docker command uses the Docker API. The Docker client can communicate with more than one daemon.
  
  Docker Desktop:
  Docker Desktop is an easy-to-install application for your Mac, Windows or Linux environment that enables you to build and share containerized applications and microservices. Docker Desktop includes the Docker daemon (dockerd), the Docker client (docker), Docker Compose, Docker Content Trust, Kubernetes, and Credential Helper. For more information, see Docker Desktop.
  
  Docker registries:
  A Docker registry stores Docker images. Docker Hub is a public registry that anyone can use, and Docker is configured to look for images on Docker Hub by default. You can even run your own private registry.
  
  When you use the docker pull or docker run commands, the required images are pulled from your configured registry. When you use the docker push command, your image is pushed to your configured registry. Docker objects
  
  When you use Docker, you are creating and using images, containers, networks, volumes, plugins, and other objects. This section is a brief overview of some of those objects.
  
  Dockerfile:
  Dockerfile is a file where you provide the steps to build your Docker Image.
  
  Images:
  An image is a read-only template with instructions for creating a Docker container. Often, an image is based on another image, with some additional customization. For example, you may build an image which is based on the ubuntu image, but installs the Apache web server and your application, as well as the configuration details needed to make your application run.
  
  You might create your own images or you might only use those created by others and published in a registry. To build your own image, you create a Dockerfile with a simple syntax for defining the steps needed to create the image and run it. Each instruction in a Dockerfile creates a layer in the image. When you change the Dockerfile and rebuild the image, only those layers which have changed are rebuilt. This is part of what makes images so lightweight, small, and fast, when compared to other virtualization technologies.
  
  IMAGES: 
  A Docker Image is a read-only template that contains everything needed to run an application:

  Application code
  
  Libraries
  
  Dependencies
  
  Configuration files
  
  Images are created using a Dockerfile and serve as the blueprint for creating Docker Containers.
  
  CONTAINERS:
  A Docker Container is a lightweight and isolated and  running instance of a Docker image.
  
  It uses the image as a base and adds a writable layer on top.
  
  Containers can be started, stopped, moved, or deleted.
  
  # List Docker images
  docker images
  
  # Pull a Docker image from a registry
  docker pull mysql

  # Search for Docker images in a registry
  docker search mysql
  
  
  
  note: Docker images are built with layers
  
  # Show the history of a Docker image
  docker image history in28min/hello-world-java:0.0.1.RELEASE
  
  # Show the history of a Docker image with a given image ID
  docker image history 100229ba687e
  
  # Inspect a Docker image
  docker image inspect 100229ba687e
  
  # Remove a Docker image
  docker image remove mysql

  # Remove a Docker image with a given image name and tag
  docker image remove in28min/hello-world-java:0.0.1.RELEASE

  # Remove a Docker container with a given container ID or name
  docker container rm 3e657ae9bd16
  
  # List all containers, including stopped ones
  docker container ls -a

  # Pause a running container with a given container ID or name
  docker container pause 832

  # Unpause a paused container with a given container ID or name
  docker container unpause 832

  # Stop a running container with a given container ID or name
  docker container stop 832

  # Inspect a Docker container with a given container ID or name
  docker container inspect ff521fa58db3
  
  #Kill a running container with a given container ID or name
  docker container kill 832
  
  # Remove all stopped containers
  docker container prune
  
  
  Note: Difference between stop and kill. when we stop a container it stops background application and giving them time to shutdown gracefully.
        where as when you kill it shut down imediatly without giving time to shutdown gracefully.
		
		
		when we stop it sends signal to SIGTERM and when we kill it sends signal SIGKILL
		
		
		
		
  # Show Docker system information
  docker system
  
  # Show Docker disk usage
  docker system df
  
  # Show detailed Docker system information
  docker system info
  
  # Remove all unused Docker resources
  docker system prune -a
  
  # Display the top resource-consuming processes of a Docker container with a given container ID or name
  docker top 9009722eac4d
  
  # Show live resource usage statistics of a Docker container with a given container ID or name
  docker stats 9009722eac4d
  
  # Run a Docker container with a Java hello world application, limited to 512MB memory
  docker container run -p 5000:5000 -d -m 512m in28min/hello-world-java:0.0.1.RELEASE
  
  # Run a Docker container with a Java hello world application, limited to 512MB memory and CPU quota of 50%
  docker container run -p 5000:5000 -d -m 512m --cpu-quota=50000 in28min/hello-world-java:0.0.1.RELEASE
  
  # Show Docker system events
  docker system events
  
  
  
  
  
  # Show live resource usage statistics of a Docker container with a given container ID or name
  docker container stats 4faca1ea914e3e4587d1d790948ec6cb8fa34f26e900c12632fd64d4722fd59a
  
  # Show live resource usage statistics of a Docker container with a given container ID or name
  docker stats 42f170966ce613d2a16d7404495af7b3295e01aeb9142e1fa1762bbdc581f502		
  
  
  
  Building application from scratch:
  
  1. Create docker file.
  
  2. To create docker image - run command - docker build -t <name and tag> .
  
  3. then create docker container from docker image - docker run -d -p 5000:5000 <container name> <image name>
  
  
  
  # Show the history of a Docker image with a given image ID
  docker history e66dc383f7a0

  # Push a Docker image to a registry
  docker push in28min/hello-world-python:0.0.2.RELEASE
  
  
  Basic Image creation:
  
   FROM ubuntu
   
   WORKDIR /app
   
   COPY requirment.txt /app
   COPY devops /app
   
   RUN sudo apt update && Sudo apt install python3 
   
   ENTRYPOINT ["python"]
   CMD {"manage.py", "runserver", "196.168.0.18:8000"}
   
   
   Difference between CMD and ENTRYPOINT?
   
   ENTRYPOINT Defines the main executable that always runs when a container starts.
   CMD: Provides default arguments to ENTRYPOINT or defines a default command if ENTRYPOINT is not specified.
   
   ENTRYPOINT: Cannot be overridden by arguments in docker run (unless you use --entrypoint).
   CMD: Can be overridden by arguments passed in docker run.
   
   
   
   What is a multi-stage Docker build?
    A multi-stage build lets you use multiple FROM statements in a single Dockerfile.
    Each FROM creates a new stage — you can copy artifacts from one stage to another.
    
    Why?
    
    You can use big base images with build tools (like compilers, SDKs) in earlier stages.
    
    Then copy only the built artifacts into a smaller base image (like alpine) in the final stage.
    
    This keeps the final image small, secure, and production-ready
	
	
 What is a Distroless image?
  A Distroless image is a Docker base image that contains only your application and its runtime dependencies — nothing else.
  
  ✅ No package manager
  ✅ No shell
  ✅ No OS utilities like bash, apt, curl
  ✅ Smaller attack surface, faster startup, and smaller image size.	
  
  
  
  
  
  Docker Volumes and Bind Mounts|Persistent Storage for Docker:
  
  Docker Volumes: volume can be created s3, Disk storage. and it is managedby docker.
  
  ✅ What they are:
  
  Managed by Docker in the Docker storage area (/var/lib/docker/volumes/ on Linux).
  
  Docker handles creation, mounting, and cleanup.
  
  Portable across hosts if you back up the volume directory.
  
  ✅ When to use:
  
  Sharing data between containers.
  
  Storing databases, logs, or app data that should persist even if the container is deleted.
  
  You want Docker to manage your data.
  
  
  2️. Bind Mounts
  ✅ What they are:
  
  Maps a file or directory on the host directly into the container.
  
  The host path must exist; Docker doesn’t manage it.
  
  Full control: if you edit the file on your host, it changes in the container instantly.
  
  ✅ When to use:
  
  Local development: mount source code to a container for live-reloading.
  
  Debugging: mount config files, logs.
  
  Temporary situations when you want exact control over the host file system.
    
	
	Interviews QUESTIONS and ANSWERS:
	
	1. What is Docker?
	2. How Containers are different From VMs?
	3. What is Docker Life Cycle?
	4. What are the different Docker Componenets?
	5. What is the Difference Between CMD and ENTRYPOINT?
	6. What are different types of networking in Docker and what is default ?
	7. How to isolate networking between containers?
	8. What is multi-stage built in docker?
	9. what are distro less images?
	10. Real time challenges with docker?
	11. what steps you take to secure Docker containers?
	
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  