


---------------------------------------------------------------Kubernates---------------------------------------------------------------

 Why we need Kubernatees?
 After Docker came into the Picture, the deployment of the applications was very easy on the 
 containers because containers are lightweight. But after some time, there were a lot of issues 
 arose such as managing the huge amount of containers in the Production environment where 
 Containers failed leading to huge Business losses. 
 After Kubernetes came, it automates many tasks such as: 
 ●  Autoscaling of Containers according to the peak or normal hours. 
 ●  Load balancing of multiple containers. 
 ●  Automatically deployment of containers to the available nodes in the cluster. 
 ●  Self-healing if containers fail. 
 
 
 Features of Kubernetes:
 
 ●  AutoScaling  : Kubernetes supports two types of autoscaling  horizontal and vertical 
    scaling for large-scale production environments which helps to reduce the downtime of 
    the applications. 
	
 ●  Auto Healing  : Kubernetes supports auto healing which  means if the containers fail or 
    are stopped due to any issues, with the help of Kubernetes components(which will talk in 
    upcoming days), containers will automatically repaired or heal and run again properly.
	
 ●  Load Balancing  : With the help of load balancing, Kubernetes  distributes the traffic 
    between two or more containers. 
	
 ●  Platform Independent  : Kubernetes can work on any type  of infrastructure whether it’s 
    On-premises, Virtual Machines, or any Cloud. 
	
 ●  Fault Tolerance  : Kubernetes helps to notify nodes  or pods failures and create new pods 
    or containers as soon as possible.
	
 ●  Rollback  : You can switch to the previous version. 
 
 ●  Health Monitoring of Containers  : Regularly check the  health of the monitor and if any 
    container fails, create a new container. 
	
 ●  Orchestration  : Suppose, three containers are running  on different networks 
   (On-premises, Virtual Machines, and On the Cloud). Kubernetes can create one cluster 
    8 that has all three running containers from different networks. 
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	Master-Slave/ Client-Server Architecture in Kubernetes:
	
	Kubernetes follows client-server architecture where the Master Node and Worker node 
    exist which constitutes a ‘Kubernetes Cluster’. We can have multiple worker nodes and 
    Master nodes according to the requirement. 
	
	
	Master Node:
	  1. API Server:  In Simple terms, after installing the  kubectl on the master node 
                      developers run the commands to create pods. So, the command will go to the 
                      API Server, and then, the API Server forwards it to that component which will 
                      help to create the pods. In other words, the API Server is an entry point for 
                      any Kubernetes task where the API Server follows the hierarchical approach 
                      to implement the things. 
					  
	  2. Etcd  : Etcd is like a database that stores all the  pieces of information of the 
                 Master node and Worker node(entire cluster) such as Pods IP, Nodes, 
                 networking configs, etc. Etcd stored data in key-value pair. The data comes 
                 from the API Server to store in etc. 	

      3. Controller Manager:  The controller Manager collects  the data/information 
                              from the API Server of the Kubernetes cluster like the desired state of the 
                              cluster and then decides what to do by sending the instructions to the API 
                              Server.	
  
      4. Scheduler: Once the API Server gathers the information  from the Controller 
                    Manager, the API Server notifies the Scheduler to perform the respective task 
                    such as increasing the number of pods, etc. After getting notified, the 
                    Scheduler takes action on the provided work.   
					
					
					
	Worker node: 

      1.  Kubelet  : kubelet is the primary component of the Worker  Node which manages the 
                     Pods and regularly checks whether the pod is running or not. If pods are not working 
                     properly, then kubelet creates a new pod and replaces it with the previous one because 
                     the failed pod can’t be restarted hence, the IP of the pod might be changed. Also, 
                     kubelet gets the details related to pods from the API Server which exists on the Master 
                     Node. 
		  
      2.  Kube-proxy  : kube-proxy contains all the network configuration  of the entire cluster such 
                        as pod IP, etc. Kube-proxy takes care of the load balancing and routing which comes 
                        under networking configuration. Kube-proxy gets the information about pods from the 
                        API Server which exists on Master Node. 
                        
      3.  Pods  : A pod is a very small unit that contains a container or multiple containers where 
                  the application is deployed. Pod has a Public or Private IP range that distributes the 
                  proper IP to the containers. It’s good to have one container under each pod. 
      
	  4.  Container Engine  : To provide the runtime environment  to the container, Container 
                              Engine is used. In Kubernetes, the Container engine directly interacts with container 
                              runtime which is responsible for creating and managing the containers. There are a lot of 
                              Container engines present in the market such as CRI-O, containerd, rkt(rocket), etc. But 
                              Docker is one of the most used and trusted Container Engine. So, we will use that in our 
                              upcoming day while setting up the Kubernetes cluster. 	