

 What is kubernatees?
 kubernetes is an open-source container orchestration engine designed for automating the 
 deployment, scaling, and management of containerized applications. This open-source project is 
 hosted by the Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF). 
 
 Why do we need Kubernetes? 
 After Docker came into the Picture, the deployment of the applications was very easy on the 
 containers because containers are lightweight. But after some time, there were a lot of issues 
 arose such as managing the huge amount of containers in the Production environment where 
 Containers failed leading to huge Business losses. 
 
 After Kubernetes came, it automates many tasks such as: 
 ●  Autoscaling of Containers according to the peak or normal hours. 
 ●  Load balancing of multiple containers. 
 ●  Automatically deployment of containers to the available nodes in the cluster. 
 ●  Self-healing if containers fail. 
 
 Features of Kubernetes:
 ●  AutoScaling  : Kubernetes supports two types of autoscaling  horizontal and vertical 
    scaling for large-scale production environments which helps to reduce the downtime of 
    the applications. 
 ●  Auto Healing  : Kubernetes supports auto healing which  means if the containers fail or 
    are stopped due to any issues, with the help of Kubernetes components(which will talk in 
    upcoming days), containers will automatically repaired or heal and run again properly. 
 ●  Load Balancing  : With the help of load balancing, Kubernetes  distributes the traffic 
    between two or more containers. 
 ●  Platform Independent  : Kubernetes can work on any type  of infrastructure whether it’s 
    On-premises, Virtual Machines, or any Cloud. 
 ●  Fault Tolerance  : Kubernetes helps to notify nodes  or pods failures and create new pods 
    or containers as soon as possible 
 ●  Rollback  : You can switch to the previous version. 
 ●  Health Monitoring of Containers  : Regularly check the  health of the monitor and if any 
    container fails, create a new container. 
	
	
	
	Master-Slave/ Client-Server Architecture in Kubernetes:
	
	Kubernetes follows client-server architecture where the Master Node and Worker node 
    exist which constitutes a ‘Kubernetes Cluster’. We can have multiple worker nodes and 
    Master nodes according to the requirement.
	
	Master Node/Control plane:
	The control plane components, including the API server, etcd, scheduler, and controller 
    manager, are typically found on the master node(s) of a Kubernetes cluster. These 
    components are responsible for managing and controlling the cluster as a whole.

    The master node is responsible for the entire Kubernetes cluster and manages all the 
    activities inside the cluster in which master nodes communicate with the worker node to 
    run the applications on the containers smoothly. Master Node has four primary 
    components which help to manage all the things that we have discussed earlier: 	
	
	1.  API Server:            In Simple terms, after installing the  kubectl on the master node 
                               developers run the commands to create pods. So, the command will go to the 
                               API Server, and then, the API Server forwards it to that component which will 
                               help to create the pods. In other words, the API Server is an entry point for 
                               any Kubernetes task where the API Server follows the hierarchical approach 
                               to implement the things.
					           
    2. ETCD:                   Etcd is like a database that stores all the  pieces of information of the 
                               Master node and Worker node(entire cluster) such as Pods IP, Nodes, 
                               networking configs, etc. Etcd stored data in key-value pair. The data comes 
                               from the API Server to store in etc. 	

    3. Controller Manager:	   The controller Manager collects  the data/information 
                               from the API Server of the Kubernetes cluster like the desired state of the 
                               cluster and then decides what to do by sending the instructions to the API 
                               Server.				  
                               
	4. Scheduler:              Once the API Server gathers the information  from the Controller 
                               Manager, the API Server notifies the Scheduler to perform the respective task 
                               such as increasing the number of pods, etc. After getting notified, the 
                               Scheduler takes action on the provided work.	

   

 Worker Node: 
 The Worker Node is the mediator who manages and takes care of the containers and 
 communicates with the Master Node which gives the instructions to assign the resources to the 
 containers scheduled. A Kubernetes cluster can have multiple worker nodes to scale resources 
 as needed. 
  
 The Worker Node contains four components that help to manage containers and communicate 
 with the Master Node:  
 
 1. Kubelet:          kubelet is the primary component of the Worker  Node which manages the 
                      Pods and regularly checks whether the pod is running or not. If pods are not working 
                      properly, then kubelet creates a new pod and replaces it with the previous one because 
                      the failed pod can’t be restarted hence, the IP of the pod might be changed. Also, 
                      kubelet gets the details related to pods from the API Server which exists on the Master 
                      Node.
			 
 2. Kube-proxy:       kube-proxy contains all the network configuration  of the entire cluster such 
                      as pod IP, etc. Kube-proxy takes care of the load balancing and routing which comes 
                      under networking configuration. Kube-proxy gets the information about pods from the 
                      API Server which exists on Master Node.
				      
 3. Pods:             A pod is a very small unit that contains a container or multiple containers where 
                      the application is deployed. Pod has a Public or Private IP range that distributes the 
                      proper IP to the containers. It’s good to have one container under each pod.

 4. Container Engine: To provide the runtime environment  to the container, Container 
                      Engine is used. In Kubernetes, the Container engine directly interacts with container 
                      runtime which is responsible for creating and managing the containers. There are a lot of 
                      Container engines present in the market such as CRI-O, containerd, rkt(rocket), etc. But 
                      Docker is one of the most used and trusted Container Engine. So, we will use that in our 
                      upcoming day while setting up the Kubernetes cluster.	


 
 What are the different Types of Kubernetes Distributions? What Distributions our organisation uses?
 A Kubernetes distribution is a packaged version of upstream Kubernetes, often bundled with:
   1. Tools for installation, upgrades, and lifecycle management.
   2. Opinionated configurations (security, networking, storage).
   3. Vendor-specific support.
   4. Extra features for enterprise needs (RBAC, policy enforcement, observability, multi-tenancy, etc.).
   
 Why use a distribution?
   1. Running raw upstream Kubernetes can be complex — distros make it production-ready.   
   2. Adds tested integrations for networking, storage, logging, monitoring.   
   3. Provides compliance/security hardening.
   4. Offers commercial support and SLAs.
                 							   
     
	
    	Popular Kubernetes distributions for corporates:
		
		
		Please refer picture in folder - K8s_Distribution
		
		
 How do organizations choose a distro?
  🔑 Key factors for corporates:
     
     On-prem vs. cloud vs. hybrid — Do you want fully managed (EKS/AKS/GKE) or self-managed (OpenShift/Rancher)?
     
     Compliance/security — Do you need FIPS, FedRAMP, or other certifications?
     
     Integration — Does it integrate with your IAM (LDAP/AD), network policies, storage?
     
     Support — 24x7 support, SLAs, certified engineers?
     
     Multi-cluster/multi-tenant — Do you need to run many clusters across regions/clouds?
     
     Dev experience — Do dev teams want built-in CI/CD or developer portals?
     

  ✅ Examples
  📌 Example 1: A large bank might pick Red Hat OpenShift for its baked-in security, certified operators, and multi-cluster control.
  
  📌 Example 2: A SaaS company fully on AWS might use EKS, to offload control plane management and integrate with other AWS services.
  
  📌 Example 3: An organization with many vSphere workloads might adopt VMware Tanzu, for tight integration with existing VMware tools.
  
  
    My First pod yaml:
	
                                                apiVersion: v1
                                                kind: Pod
                                                metadata:
                                                  name: my-first-pod
                                               	labels:
                                               	  app: v1
                                                spec:
                                                  containers:
                                               	  - name: nginx
                                               	    image: nginx:latest
                                               		
                                               		
 Command for pods:
 
    Deploy the Pod:
	 kubectl apply -f my_first_pod
	 
	List Pods:
     kubectl get pods
	 
    Check Logs: 
     kubectl logs -f <pod_name>
	 
    To check the logs of the primary container:
     kubectl logs -f <pod_name> -c <container_name>
	 
	To check the logs of the second container:
     kubectl logs -f <pod_name> -c <container2_name>
	 
	Delete the Pod: 
     kubectl delete pod <pod_name>

    To list the IP of the pod:
     kubectl pod <pod_name> -c <container_name> --hostname -i 	
	 
	To delete the pod by specifying the manifest file name:
     kubectl delete -f my_first_pod.yml


 Deployment files:

  ●  Purpose  : Deployment files contain all information  about the application and define how 
                he application or microservices will be deployed on the Kubernetes cluster. In 
                eployment files, we can define the desired state, pod replicas, update strategies, and 
                od templates. 
 
 ●  Contents  : Deployment files define the desired state  of a deployment, pod replicas, 
                container images, and resource limits. 
 
 ●  Usage  : Deployment files are mainly used by developers  and administrators to manage 
             the application lifecycle within Kubernetes. They enable declarative application 
             management, scaling, and rolling updates.

 my_first_deployment.yml

 apiVersion: v1
 kind: Deployment
 metadata:
   name: my_deployment
   labels:
     apps: v1
 spec:
   replicas: 2
   selector:
     matchLabels:
       apps: v1
    template: 
      metadata:
        name: my_first_pod
        labels:
          apps: v1
      spec:
        - name: nginx
       	  image: nignx:latest
		  containerPort: 80
		  
 Details of deployments:
  In this example, 
  ●  apiVersion  and  kind  define the resource type.
  
  ●  metadata  specify the details of deployment such as  the name of the deployment, and 
     labels.
	 
  ●  spec  defines the desired state of the Deployment. 
  
  ●  replicas  specify the desired number of pods to maintain.
  
  ●  The  selector  specifies on which pod the replica configuration  should be applied with the 
     help of the label of the pod.
	 
  ●  template  describes the pod template and how deployment  will use it to create new pods.
  
  ●  containers  will list the containers to run within  the pod. 
  
  ●  name  specifies the name of the container.
  
  ●  image  specifies the name that will be used to run  the container. The image will be a 
  Docker Image. 
  
  ●  containerport  specifies the port at which the container  will listen for incoming traffic.  
		  
		  
                	 